Let's go ahead and get to the major news here in Washington.
The border bill arrived and seemingly died
upon arrival.
It was negotiated by Senator James Lankford,
Senator Kirsten Cinema and some uh Senator Chris
Murphy as well from the Democratic side,
uh Kristen Cinema, I guess from the independent side.
So we call it that crystal. And then we have uh Senator
Langford being from the State of Oklahoma.
So Senator Langford appeared on Fox and Friends
yesterday morning to make his case for the bill
and to rebut some of his GOP colleagues
who preemptively were rejecting some of the details.
Here's what he had to say.
He said no self respecting senators should agree to
vote on the 370 page bill this week.
Any 41 senators can prevent the bill from proceeding
if you agree that senators should have this bill
for at least a few weeks and certainly more than a few days before voting on it.
Say so,
uh you understand where he's coming from, right?
Don't you guys have a procedural vote this week?
Are you going to vote on the bill by the end of the week?
So we actually had this bill came out yesterday Sunday.
Uh,
the first procedural vote is Wednesday and that procedural vote is literally just
open it up to be able to go through it and to be able to say,
are we going to debate it this week?
That's what Senator Lee is actually talking about. It's interesting
that he said he's already opposed to it.
He needs three weeks to be able to read it, but he's already opposed to it.
Uh So, uh again, people have got to be able to read it, go through it themselves.
Don't just go off a Facebook post somewhere.
What the bill says, this dramatically changes asylum and dram
radical changes, deportations. We no longer have a 10 year backlog.
It builds more wall.
Those are the key things that it actually does, but read it for yourselves.
Don't just believe what's online,
read it for yourselves and uh many Republicans
did and still have ended up rejecting it.
We will get to that. But uh there's actually a good summary of this deal from Bill Milu
and some of you guys may be familiar with him.
He's the Fox news reporter who covers the border.
He's very critical of the immigration situation of Biden.
So I think, you know, his overall summary,
I think you could take uh from the most skeptical point of view.
We can go ahead and put this up there on the screen and I'll read from some of it.
So he says, quote, knew my initial highlights from the border deal.
There's no amnesty and legalization of anyone already who is in the US illegally.
It funds an increase for ice detention capacity from 50,000.
From the current 34,000.
There's a seven day, this is the most controversial part.
So please pay attention to this at a seven day rolling average
of 5000 encounters per day or 8500 encounters in a single day.
The Department of Homeland Security quote would be required to
shut the border down and turn away anyone who crosses
no new asylum claims would be allowed.
Anyone crossing would be removed, it would end the idea of quote,
I made it to us soil and you have to process me that would be
over border patrol would not process an illegal crosser and they would be removed.
No asylum claim permitted unless it was made at a port of entry.
Pay, pay attention to that because it's important
they can go on and they say this does not mean that quote, for quote,
5000 are allowed in before the authority kicks in single adults would be detained.
Families would be released by alternative to detention.
Asylum cases would be fast tracked to months rather
than years under a new rapid expanded system.
Those who fail would be quickly removed from the US.
The initial pass would be reviewed from work
authorization claims and 90 day supervision until final,
final asylum claim is determined
shutdown. Authority doesn't drop until the crossings decrease significantly
in the days.
Following that significantly,
there are tougher asylum requirements and highly credible
fear standard including the three bars to eligibility,
criminal history.
Could they have resettled in another country on the
way to the US called a safe third country?
And quote, could they have resettled somewhere else in their own country?
Just saying that you're scared to return home no longer is enough to.
In the initial interview,
it appears that that legislation would then
move asylum claim decisions away from immigration judges
and have them be handled by US cis which is the US immigration
system. Next.
They talk here about some of the increases
to fema humanitarian aid uh increase in the
number of new visas that will be granted over the last five years to 50,000 funding.
And this is another important part.
I want to pay attention to funding to hire hundreds or ice deportation officers,
border patrol agents and US cis asylum officers.
It says no unaccompanied minor could be removed and some of
these minors would receive attorneys pro bono and are taxpayer funded.
DH S would take 90 days to have this new system before it goes into place.
And the context that he adds at the end is that the border has seen at
least 5000 encounters almost every single day of
the last couple of years under Biden.
So if the bill were signed
law, the border would likely be shut down on the first day that it takes effect.
So crystal, with all of that and with that skeptical summary,
I think here by the Fox News reporter,
it does seem to still mean that almost all Republicans have rejected it out of hand.
The House of Representatives say it's a nonstarter
-- and then it's not going
-- to happen.
Yeah, I mean, I think it's pretty clear there.
This is a bill that is very, you know, pretty far in the restrictionist direction.
Um It is not something that Democrats ever would have agreed to
under Donald Trump or would agree to next time under Donald Trump.
Historically,
any sort of increased enforcement mechanisms have been tied in a quote
unquote comprehensive immigration bill with some sort of path to legalization.
There is absolutely none of that there.
Um There's a real, so I,
I do wanna say there are pieces of this bill
that I would actually support including as we've discussed.
I mean,
one of the biggest problems is you have
this massive asylum case backlog millions of cases.
So it takes years for these cases to be adjudicated.
You know,
there are provisions in here that would help to expedite that and also would
flood the zone with resources to help uh get rid of that backlog.
I think that part is important,
but there's also a sort of direct attack on asylum
itself making it much more difficult to claim asylum.
It's already extremely difficult to be granted asylum.
The bar is already extremely high.
And then there's also as we discussed before this, uh, quote unquote,
shut down the border, which is a little bit misleading how this is labeled.
But basically, the idea is once you get to over 5000 on average, on a daily basis,
there are some provisions in there like the president could change that authority,
which is the other piece is like
you are giving the president whether it's Biden
or Trump massive new powers under this bill.
But the idea is once you get to that 5000,
you basically sort of like end due process and say, screw it to asylum whatsoever.
So let me just talk about the politics because in some ways,
what's in the bill isn't all that important given that
it
have a chance in hell of passing.
Um You know, the politics here are that Trump basically came out and said,
I don't want you guys to support this bill and the Republican Party was like, ok,
we won't.
And so someone like James Langford who, um you know, took at face value,
the idea that the Republicans actually wanted a
deal that combined border funding with Ukraine funding
is real funding,
which was what Republicans were pushing for at the beginning of this process.
Someone like him who, you know,
really tried to negotiate in good faith and
really tried to give Republicans the like,
restrictionist ideas that he wanted under
the context of a democratic administration.
He's left holding the bag like, hey guys, I thought this is what y'all wanted.
But you know, the politics at the end of the day rules the day,
one more thing on the politics because I think this is important.
There is a lot of democratic glee about, oh Biden, he's so clever, like,
look at how he called their bluff and now he's
flipped the script on immigration and now Republicans are,
you know,
look bad on this and it's they're exposed as
not really wanting to be serious about this problem.
I don't buy that analysis at
all.
I do not buy that analysis at all.
Number one, the border, whatever is happening,
there is still happening on your watch and you know, whatever I think of it,
there are many Americans who find the chaos.
And I think that's fair that who want to see an
orderly border process and that does not exist right now.
That is still going to be the case.
It is still going to be under a Biden administration. And so that's a problem.
Number two,
you know, in the last election,
Biden versus Trump,
we had that prior to that election,
we had the whole child separation policy
which Americans were genuinely horrified by.
I mean, it was terrible,
these kids who were orphaned by the United States government,
you know, the audio that was leaked of the border patrol agents mocking them.
And um all of that was horrifying
and Biden in part to win a Democratic primary.
He really positioned himself as being much
more compassionate of having this uh inclusive
message about immigration saying he would be a clean break from Donald Trump.
And that ended up being a winning message.
I mean, I'm not gonna say that was like the number one reason why he got elected,
but that was part of the appeal is it would be a
break from the cruelty and the chaos of a Donald Trump administration.
What Biden and the Democrats have effectively done here
is just embraced all of the Republican arguments on immigration
just completely caved and effectively said like you're right
about immigration and your model is the right model.
And guess what
if you want a border hawk, you are not going to defeat Donald Trump on those grounds?
Like why would you compete on who can be the biggest asshole at the border?
You are not going to win that competition?
So one of the basics of politics is to try to fight the fight that you want
to fight on the grounds that you want to want to engage where your strengths are.
No,
don't go to the place where he's the strongest where if it's a competition of
like who's going to be the most cruel and the most restriction is the border,
there's no doubt that Donald Trump and Stephen
Miller are gonna win that all day long.
So I think all of this celebration. Oh Biden, so clever, Biden, so smart.
This was such a great ploy is insane. I think it's, I
think it's ridiculous and I think it's foolish.
I totally agree on the politics, disagree a bit on the policy.
People can go watch some of our debates on that in the past.
But yeah, I mean, listen, no matter what, like I, I'm a,
I'm a pretty strong immigration voter.
I would say it's one of the main,
if anything still ties me to the main Republican party, it would be immigration.
Why would I ever vote for Biden?
It's like one of those where if this is a policy
where it's one of my number one issues and I,
why would I vote for somebody who uh consistently undermined the immigration
over the first three years got dragged here,
kicking and screaming and is trying to do this
to, for a political ploy, which as you said, is not going to work.
Now,
I'll take myself out of it and just say who are people who are voting on the border?
If you are voting on the border, you're a Republican.
Like I, I just want to break it to you.
You, you, you are,
you are the number one issue in the Republican
party today amongst the GOP primary electorate is immigration.
Also something else that has become very clear on the politics here.
I'm curious what you think of this is that in the past, excuse me,
is that in the past is that there was
a major split on immigration in the Republican Party,
Lindsey Graham Marco Rubio, the gang of eight by and large embraced in 2013.
Uh the idea of comprehensive immigration reform paired
with some future border enforcement now with the
basically the shutdown and the collapse of GOP support for even a bill like this.
It basically means Trump has
won the argument within the party. Even in this.
It is over the starting point for the Republican Party now is
00 illegal immigration asylum itself over I support that by the way,
just so everybody knows in terms of revamping our asylum process.
But my point is is that this view was
a minority view within the establishment Republican Party.
And the way that, you know,
this crystal is that the US Chamber of Commerce endorsed this bill,
it doesn't matter at all. They know, why did they endorse it?
Well, because they like cheap labor. But that's a secondary part.
My point is just that the establishment centers of power,
the big business groups and others, which
we combined with the
Koch parties had, I wouldn't say they'd won the argument with voters,
but they certainly had won with the establishment to have a guy
like Langford who comes from that wing of the party who did,
you know, even he tried to negotiate something like this and they
just be nuked outright.
I think that demonstrates like a major shift in immigration politics, period.
I also agree with you on the democratic side,
which is, and this is where I,
I actually want to know what you think because for me under Trump,
it was easy to scream about child separation even though Obama did it too.
And all of this and then everyone
just conveniently forgets that whenever it happens.
But to me, the asylum and the images of the border under Biden just became
so untenable within the system that they're trying to use past frameworks to the
for the current problem where you have 6 to 8 million people that cross,
you know, under the Biden administration,
it just seems to have collapsed within its own logic.
-- Well,
-- I mean,
the collapse is a long time coming and predates Joe Biden because basically,
I mean to go back in some of the the history of our immigration system
for a long time,
the overwhelming number of people who were coming to America
were single Mexican males who were coming for work.
And there started to be a shift
um largely driven by the way, by our totally messed up foreign policy.
Vis a vis Guatemala, El Salvador in particular,
where these countries became incredibly violent and it was incredibly dangerous.
And the number of people coming from those northern triangle countries spiked
we have not had a major overhaul of our immigration system
-- since the early nineties we
-- have.
So, so we have a system that even at, it's, you know,
even when it was sort of reflective of
the predominant type of migrant that was coming,
it's not like it was working that well then either.
And, you know,
it's never been updated to be able to process
the number of asylum claims that are coming in.
There's, you know, always been this tension over, OK, who actually is uh
who actually merits asylum.
There's been a massive amount of discrimination between the
types of migrants that will be granted asylum.
For example, if you're from Cuba probably granted asylum.
If you're from Guatemala,
you're not going to be granted asylum.
If you're from Haiti, you're not gonna be granted for asylum.
If you're from El Salvador,
you're not gonna be granted asylum if you're from like a former communist country.
Um you know, escaping persecute Venezuela, for example,
you will be granted asylum.
So it's always been very selective,
very political and largely broken and the resources inadequate to deal
with the number of people who come now claiming asylum.
And that really is the core of the issue.
Now, the other piece of the issue was of course, just a question of like, OK,
but how many people do you want to come?
How many people is appropriate for, you know,
how many people I think there's a practical consideration of how
many people can be absorbed in a nation at a time,
given the amount of resources, et cetera.
My number for that is much higher than your number for that.
Um You know, I mean, that's where we just like wildly differ.
I think we can agree on the need for the additional resources to process the claims.
But when it comes to how many people should come into the country, you know,
I think we, we feel very differently about that.
But
with Joe Biden, what do I think happened that brought him to this place?
First of all, I do think he had this idea of like, oh, I'm gonna call their bluff. And
it's an instinct that we have seen reflected in a bunch of
European nations as well among these sort of like center left neos
where it's like,
oh the right is beating me up on immigration. So let me pretend like I'm on the right.
And I was telling you there was a study that the Guardian wrote up
recently that looked at whether or not that worked electorally and they were like,
no, doesn't work because if people want an immigration asshole, sorry,
then they're gonna vote for the most, you know, for the right wing party.
At
the same time, you're demoralizing your own base,
Biden as we know because of Israel and other issues.
But in, in particular, because of Israel, his base is already demoralized.
This only further is like another thumb in their eye of
I'm gonna be even harsher on immigration than Donald Trump was.
And I'm gonna completely flip from the messaging that I ran on back in 2020.
So I think electorally it's foolish. I think the other thing that happens
is because you did have these like, I think the,
the project of bussing migrants into cities.
I think that that was very effective because it is true that, you know,
especially like a city like New York.
Now, I think it's preposterous, the idea that a gigantic city like New York,
a city that in a very short period of time in
the last century gained 30% of its population and is a city
of immigrants
can't handle absorbing 100,000 plus immigrants. I think that's preposterous. But
if people are coming with zero resources all at once and
no work permits even to be able to provide for themselves.
Well, yeah, that's a, that is a drain on resources.
That's a difficult thing to deal with
and they have the right to shelter.
And so Eric Adams is going like, you know, I need help. What are we gonna do?
And Kathy Hogel is the same thing and Chicago mayor, same thing.
And so I do think that that also impacted some of
the politics here of how we ended up in this place.
No question. I totally agree.
I actually think that's probably the single most impactful thing.
One of the reasons again why I think it collapsed
on its own logic is Europe is a good example.
So back in 2015, if people will remember,
there was the great Syrian Afghan migrant wave across Europe,
some of which they're still dealing
with today,
they had the same level of asylum law that they had to
grapple with which is like how much of this is real?
Most of these guys are military age men. What exactly does this all mean?
Are they trying to stay here?
Are they really fleeing for their lives while also they're from a war torn country?
Can we send them back? Like what do we do?
And that led to, I mean, the rise of places like Victor Orban
politics, I was just in Vienna and in Budapest,
both of them told me that the migrant crisis was the single biggest sea change
in all of politics that led to the first breakdown of the Schengen.
And since the 19 nineties,
it really undermined a lot of the internal logic of the European Union.
Even today, there's no massive battles about it.
And you know, Rishi
Soak, for example, he is under massive pressure from his right.
Uh Because of the asylum thing,
arguably Brexit would not have happened if
the German asylum invitee thing had nothing.
So the the politics of it,
I think really comes down to the fact that the law from the
nineties was just not prepared for what the situation was going to be.
I think we can genuinely agree in terms of the policy and all of that.
Now, here, as I said,
it has now been and shifted dramatically to the right for the Republican party now,
depending on where you stand.
I think that's a good thing personally.
But, you know, that's a, it's an overturn window shift nonetheless,
to underscore that guys, can we put this, please up on the screen?
It's the actual whip list,
which is the opposition right now to the Senate border deal.
Uh, that what we see here
in the opposition right now. Crystal is that you have two no votes. Bob Menendez,
Alex Padilla, actually, I believe Bernie
Sanders
-- has been added to that
-- as well. I think um Mary
and uh there's one more that I think there's
-- five Democratic or Bernie and Independent no
-- votes.
A lot of this is moving quickly. So we're to
our best.
The reason why this is important is that right now,
it is going to be very difficult for this to even get to 60 votes.
The reason why that would matter is that if it's at 60 then it can't,
even if it doesn't get 60 votes, it will not even be able to get closure.
The secondary thing that is very important to understand here,
if we could put a three please up on the
screen is that the House of Representatives has already declared.
This is a joint statement from Speaker Johnson Steve Scalise,
who's the House majority whip and Elise Stefanik have
all a statement that they've put out and say that
the Senate supplemental says any consideration of this Senate bill
in its current form is a waste of time.
It is dead capital D on arrival in the house.
We encourage the US Senate to reject it that as I understand it,
Crystal is actually playing a huge part
in undermining many of the votes in the Senate because many Republicans do not
want to take a risky vote on immigration if they know that it's not,
I mean, it makes sense.
Obviously, you know, you don't want to take a bill already.
Senator Lankford, by the way,
is under massive fire amongst the GOP faithful from
what I've seen Trump basically disavowed him yesterday.
Even though plot twist, he endorsed him. Also, many de
scientist voters are passing this around in his endorsement of Senator Lankford.
He said he's strong on the border.
You can't even make it up.
I mean, but this bill is strong on the butt like this bill which
no, this compared to the status quo.
If you're in favor of restrictionist immigration policies,
this makes it much more stringent,
it makes it, you know, much more towards the Republican vision. And I have to say
for me, what this reminds me of is, I don't know if you guys remember,
I know you remember back in the Obama days when there was all this grand bargain,
we're gonna try to get a grand bargain.
And, um, which meant like, you know,
cutting social security and Medicare basically,
and Obama came to the table with a deal like here t tea party,
I'm gonna cave to your wishes
and I'm gonna put cuts to social security and Medicare on the table.
And because they, you know,
I think it was probably some of the same logic if they didn't want to quote unquote,
give Obama a win.
But also, you know, the stated reason was like, oh,
this doesn't go far enough and this doesn't do enough.
So the tea party did,
you know the work of people like me who don't
want to see those programs cut and killed that initiative
and guess what? That never came around again.
And so, you know, I think first of all, it's,
it's very uncertain whether Donald Trump is going to end up in the White House.
I think it's a 5050 prospect. That's number one,
there's no way he's going to have a filibuster proof majority and control of the
house and be able to just like do whatever he wants on the border.
Now, he can do what he wants to do with executive action, but that's always limited
both in what you can do
and also in the duration of how long that lasts.
So if you actually want to quote unquote,
close the border and limit asylum and all of
these things like this is probably your best chance um
under a Democratic President Democrats, like I said,
would never agree to something that was so enforcement heavy
um under, you know, under Trump or under Republican president.
So I think this probably is their best chance they actually care about, you know,
the restrictionist policies that they claim to care about.
Just to give you one example,
this bill would more than double the budget of ice.
It would give the uh DH S Secretary unilateral powers to
deport as many people as he or she wants to deport.
These are powers that this is again, from the Democratic perspective.
I think this is insane
like yes,
you're giving these powers right now to Joe Biden and Joe Biden's administration.
But if Trump wins, you're giving those powers to Trump and his administration.
Are you really comfortable with that and the way that they would use those powers?
So again, I think if you actually, you know, back the rhetoric that they back
and believe in a restriction is policy,
this is probably the best deal you're gonna get.
And I am incredibly delighted,
especially when you pair it with Ukraine and Israel aid
that they wanna. Well, and there we can agree
that they want to kill this thing and that
-- it's quote unquote dead on arrival in the
-- house.
I'll give you the case that I have heard, which is mcconnell's an old man.
He's either gonna die or he's not gonna be there very soon.
And uh he's the only person who was standing Trump
actually encouraged him to nuke the filibuster in the,
in the case of uh uh
for border enforcement deal. If we remember for the border wall.
Hr Two already passed the House of Representatives.
Hr Two goes much farther than this. I'm a very strong supporter of hr two.
I think it's a great bill on immigration.
It completely reforms asylum and a very different
policy endorsed also by the Border Patrol Union.
By the way, this bill is endorsed by the border.
-- That's why I wanted
-- to talk about this. So I did some digging.
I, I asked some of my immigration friends, I go, what the hell are these doing?
Because I was, I was like this
be real Brandon Judd, who I know by the way,
Brandon was the head of the border patrol unit.
I used to work with him quite a bit in the past.
So Crystal,
one of the reasons the Border Patrol Union supports
this is because it dramatically increases their pay.
It's not just over asylum, but
they, I mean,
what they wrote in their endorsement is this gives us
-- like the strongest set of tools that we've ever
-- had.
That's true.
Yeah, absolutely no question.
But again, my case,
the case that I have heard from those who say is look mitch is going to be gone.
We already have the house. We've won the argument.
Now,
the senators are going to vote the way that we
tell them to if we nuke the filibuster for,
uh, we know many,
many Republicans who are not named Mitch mcconnell
are very open to nuking the Filibuster.
And they're like, we'll just pass our
immigration bill. I know you're
Filibuster too. So
maybe,
but there's no reason why you couldn't do that.
You couldn't pass this bill and then still do that down the road.
I think like that doesn't for
the possibility to
-- kill
-- as island down the road, the DH S secretary, you know,
gets unilateral authority.
Well, Republicans don't try.
They're impeaching him right now because they say
that he's not following the law for them.
It's actually one of the reasons not to give
power to my, I
mean, but that, no,
it gives him unilateral authority to deport as many people as he wants to report.
So
that's not like
it's not like unilateral authority to give them an amnesty.
It just goes in one direction.
So your worst case scenario is, you know, the status quo.
Well, if you give somebody a work permit and you don't deport them,
that basically is amnesty because when the hell are they gonna leave?
I mean, that's kind of the,
-- but
-- here's the thing just on a substantive level that
I genuinely don't understand and I want to hear your,
your analysis of
Republicans.
We've covered this on the show a bunch of times, talk about, you know,
all these people who are leaving New York, going to Texas,
going to Florida
and that's seen as like that internal migration is seen as like,
I think justifiably so terrible for New York
and terrible for California and fantastic for Texas
and fantastic for Florida.
But suddenly when it's people who are coming from outside the country,
even though they're also just human beings.
And by the way, immigrants,
like some of the clearly like hardest
working and oftentimes most patriotic people,
you can possibly be
suddenly when they're coming from out of the country. When they come to New York.
It's like, oh my God, this is terrible for New York.
So how is it that people leaving is bad? But also people coming is bad.
-- It's
-- a philosophical difference.
Crystal,
which is that the first part of your people are lawful permanent residents and
they're American citizens and the people who are coming here uh are not.
And in most they
could be
maybe, but you know, they don't pay taxes.
A
lot of them don't speak
-- English. That
-- would be
that.
But that would be an argument for a pathway to citizenship, to legalizing them,
bringing them out of the shadows because yeah,
the problem and this is one of the arguments about like, oh, it depresses the wages.
What depresses wages
is when you have people who are not legalized, who are in the shadows,
who are being paid under the table,
oftentimes like less than minimum wage and
not having to abide by labor regulations.
What you're making is an argument for legalizing
immigrants,
for allowing in more legal immigrants versus having this massive shadow.
-- I actually don't support
-- legalizing immigrants
and I don't support pathway to citizenship
for the vast majority of people here and I'll tell you why.
Which is that as fundamentally is a fairness issue.
People like my parents spent years and
tens of thousands of dollars on lawyers trying to get visas.
They had phd S and master's degrees. It's not that easy for people to get
a visa to this country. You can ask anybody who's like me.
Uh I think it's bullshit frankly that you can just cross the border.
Just say I fear for my life because El Salvador sucks and
you get to stay here and you get to work for 5,
10 years lively, never leave the other case.
And this is, look,
you can call me racist if you want vast
majority of people arriving here have no skills.
We're lucky if they have 1/5 grade reading level in Spanish, let alone in English.
They're not educated
in terms of the jobs that they're gonna take.
I mean, is it really fair to depress like wages for the lower class Americans? I
mean,
the
supply and demand,
it's your assumption is that there are some set
number of jobs in the economy and that's it.
End of story. It doesn't shift. So again,
it comes back to, ok, then why is it a great thing for New Yorkers to be moving to Texas?
Why is that great for Texas?
Why isn't that them taking their jobs and depressing their wages and
ruining their
etcetera?
Many people in my home state of Texas would say it's ruining
their community and it is driving prices up because of the.
Yeah.
But they brag about, oh, all the moving vans coming here to Florida and to Texas.
But when it's, when it's, you know, American citizens coming from New York,
then it's amazing and it's great for the economy, et cetera, et cetera.
But somehow, even though it's just also people,
they just happen to be coming from outside the country,
then suddenly it's terrible.
-- Doesn't that make
-- sense?
I just think there's a fundamental difference between a
guy who makes 250 $1000 from New York and
moves to Austin who's paying taxes and can buy
a house and somebody who comes here with,
I think that's so classist
because
they're
not
here.
They
think about. But I'm ok.
Put aside like, you know, who deserves what et cetera, et cetera. Just
think about the best interests of the country.
Like it's very clear
that some level of immigration
and you can see it again when we're talking about internal migration
is very good for local economies.
And you know what,
what we have seen as a nation of immigrants
is that in the subsequent waves of immigration,
some of the hardest working people, most family oriented people, et cetera
and more law abiding by the way,
are immigrants
depends on the type. But
no, not true.
If you look overall
immigrant populations, more law abiding than native born citizens,
not to mention,
yes,
when they first come and they're learning the language and
they're new et cetera and they're bringing their cultures,
we all know what the next generation looks like.
They just look like Americans, their kids are gonna speak English, they're gonna be
-- 100% American. Well,
-- it depends. Look, George Borjas
who works over at Harvard University has done a 2017 fantastic study which
shows that mass illegal immigration largely
depresses wages for lower class Americans.
So that's number one,
I would say the empirical data is pretty set on
this in terms of the laws of supply and demand.
But
number two again, is a deep philosophical difference.
I think that the net migration level that we should
have over the next 30 years should be zero.
And this is my case again, it's against and, and look, people will be like,
how can a guy, son of Indian immigrants, by the way,
my mom vehemently disagrees with me if anybody wants to know and
she also votes so she can vote the way that she wants.
If people want to know,
I'll tell you.
Which is that in the 19 nineteens and the teens, we had a hyphenated American crisis.
Very similar to the one that we have here. Mass internal strife,
complete differences of opinion.
People speak German, people speaking Italian.
They had dual loyalty to their old countries.
As we saw during the world of the first World War. It was a huge problem.
We had a massive foreign born population equivalent only to today,
internal strife was solved one way,
we dramatically lowered the level of immigration.
We let people assimilate into the country.
And for the next 40 to 50 years, we had very, very little immigration.
Now that is my case
for
becoming a cohesive nation,
which can have a true national identity and
one where the foreign born population where it is
currently at an all time high should not
continue to be higher with the orderly process.
I will also say many Indians will be pissed off at what I'm
saying because I'm also claiming that legal immigration should go to net zero.
And I strongly believe it because I do
believe that our current sovereignty and internal politics is
so divisive largely because we do not relate to one another whatsoever.
-- And that really has
-- nothing to do with immigration.
I mean,
it's
just
not
even if you look at like the the political divide
is, has never been actually less racially polarized than it is, right. Now.
And in fact, Republicans are winning.
This is the other thing with all this, like, great replacement.
Oh, they want to bring in all these immigrants just so they can vote for Democrats.
Like that's actually happening less and less. And Republicans,
republicans love to brag about how they're winning over
population, but also fear monger about how they could never win this population.
So that's another part of the conversation that I
think makes absolutely no sense and is utterly ridiculous.
The divide in this country.
Yeah, some are, you know,
there are some racial divisions but increasingly
we're actually less polarized among racial lines.
And, you know, I would, I would wager and I think most people would agree
that ultimately, the country was much better for those waves of Irish
and Italian and Polish and German immigrants.
I mean, that's part of what has made this country, what it is.
And I don't see this new wave of migrants coming from a different part of the world
in any different way.
So listen, is there, is there a limit to how much we can, you know,
bring it at one time just again, you know,
practically if you flood the zone with a whole bunch
of new people and that creates housing that there's,
there's problems.
I'm not gonna say that there's like, you know,
you can just bring in the whole world and it's not gonna call cause an issue.
But I do think that there is something
fundamentally broken in a logic that would say,
you know, it's very clear when a place like the industrial midwest empties out
and these towns are decaying and people are fleeing. It's very clear.
That's like, that's a bad thing.
It's very clear when it's New York and people are leaving New York,
that that's a bad thing.
But then somehow when it's other people who are coming in,
which in a different scenario, if they, you know, came from a different country,
a different part of the world, you say this is great.
This is wonderful. Somehow. That's terrible. It just doesn't make any sense to me.
And I don't think that the studies back up,
the studies show that if you have a massive undocumented illegal workforce,
that that can be a problem for wages, actually documented immigrants.
The overwhelming majority of studies show it's actually good for, it's
neutral on wages
in,
in general is good for the economy and helps for the like thriving of that local area.
So that's why, you know, again, I'm not like open borders just, you know,
let's have an unlimited number, but I think we can handle a lot more than we have.
I think it'd be good for all kinds of people, all kinds of parts of the country.
And I also just think it's fundamentally like
goes against some core American values,
this complete attack on the asylum process.
And this idea that
we don't care if you're being persecuted. We don't care if you fear for your lives.
You know, we don't care if you're like, you know,
a Jew trying to escape Nazi Germany or whatever
it is, you're
the
process. It is. People are not.
No, but some
people
-- you flee gang
-- violence
but hold on, hold on.
But if you end the asylum process,
you are telling people who would potentially be
fleeing a holocaust like we don't care.
That's too bad. We're full.
What we could say is if there's a future holocaust, then sure,
we on a case by case basis, we can evaluate what's going to happen.
And again, I would even say, is that the
OK, El Salvador, uh let's currently look, everyone likes to talk about root causes.
Well, what just happened?
We just had a mass election of a right wing
authoritarian president who threw all the criminals in jail and dramatic
lowered their murder rate. That proves they are adults with agency.
They can elect leaders who want to deal with their problems
and deal with their own problems and stay where they are.
El Salvador's problems are El Salvador's. Venezuela's problems are Venezuela's.
Has it been exacerbated by us? Sanctions? Sure. But at the end of the day, who can?
It's not our problem, it's not our fault,
-- your country, if your country sucks, it's your responsibility to fix
-- it.
But see, I just look at this totally different.
I mean, first of all, like, you know,
we can't exempt ourselves from the foreign policy
that we up until very recently were,
you know, screwing over these countries or
the drug war
that has, is one of the, you know,
most critical root causes in making many of these places incredibly violent.
But even if you put that aside, like I said, like,
I don't see this as like a punishment.
I think if you, if you look at it through another lens of, you know,
typically it's a great thing when people want to move
to a place when they wanna move to Florida.
Somehow.
It's a great thing, you know, when they wanna move to Texas, somehow,
it's a great thing.
So I don't see this as like, oh,
we're being punished by having to clean up other people's messes.
No, I think we should have a process that's orderly.
I think we should have enough resources to be able
to deal with the number of people that are coming.
I think we should have an ability, you know, a system that makes sense
that lets in
a certain number, you know, that's not gonna overwhelm the entire country,
but we should in general see it as a good thing that people want to come
to the United States of America and still see it as the land of opportunity.
You should see it as a land of opportunity.
It should be,
it should be a land of opportunity for people
who live here and people who are natural born,
-- us citizens or a
-- lot.
But I don't see how this,
but that's the thing is like you see this as a zero sum game and it's not,
-- it's not like
-- I said,
there's a lot of data to back it up.
Now,
in terms of the difference between the Irish
and the German is we were rapidly industrial
economy which needed cheap labor.
I would also say that a lot of people who were natural born,
hated the Irish and the Germans with some good reason because they were depleting
their wages or are willing to work for much less than they were.
And they were driving around their overall wages,
which led to major labor disputes even within unions at the time.
So
that played out 100 years ago, but that was 100 years ago.
And we can say what it is today.
We are not a rapidly industrializing
economy or rapidly de industrializing economy.
We don't need a lot of cheap labor,
the predominant amount of cheap labor that does come here and ends up working,
working in places like home health care space.
They don't, uh they end up depressing wages in places like construction
and others. And there's also we have a housing supply issue.
I mean, you know, like where are these people going to live?
But then look, this is,
this is why I don't even like to have an economic argument as much.
It's about process and it's about legality if you don't, if, for example,
and you're using the ones about, uh, El Salvador.
Why is it fair that we
in Iraq and Iraqis can't just walk here?
Don't they have more right to live here than anyone in El Salvador, I would say.
-- Yeah, absolutely.
-- Let them in.
They
can't,
we, we do have special programs for, um, I think Iraqis,
but definitely Afghan interpreters
as well who helped us in our war.
-- So
-- absolutely clarity,
but not every random Iraqi who happened to live in the country between 2003 and 2020.
It's just not, it's not a fair process that just because you can walk across Mexico
or if you're some Chinese or Haitian or whatever
that Somali or whatever you can afford a ticket
to there that, that puts you ahead of the line.
And the reason that these are all men is because it
is based upon a belief that you can come here,
you can Western Union, your money back.
And most of these countries just so people know huge portions of their
economy come from illegal labor and Western
Union transfers from the United States,
they're called remittances.
There was a huge uh effort in the Trump years to try and
tax remittances which of course the Republicans quash.
But you know, it's secondary for the conversation right now.
My only point is that it has to be orderly. I think we agree.
But on the net benefit,
I totally disagree that a bunch of people who cannot even speak English,
the vast majority of these people, some of them don't even speak Spanish.
I think a lot of people don't,
-- this
-- may be controversial on the left.
Like I don't actually have a problem with part of
the citizenship process being a requirement to speak English.
So make that a requirement. I mean, that's the thing is you can't say that
you can't say,
but you can't say
you have to follow the process, but then there is no process to follow and,
and be like, also I'm gonna make sure that there is no process to follow.
I just, you know, I think that's fundamentally unfair
and, you know, the other thing is like,
there's this assumption that everyone in the world
would come to the United States of America.
They could
and that's just not borne out by the data even among um you know,
there's a lot of focus on the like Central and South American migrants who come here.
Um There's far more Venezuelans who have migrated
to neighboring countries to Venezuela than there are,
who have attempted to come here.
People typically they wanna, you know, if they're under pressure, first of all,
most people don't want to leave their homes.
And I think anyone out there could relate to like you, like where you live
have a certain level of comfort like you wanna stay in your home.
So already, if you're like, I have to migrate,
this is a pretty extraordinary circumstance.
Then most people,
the overall majority of migrants are looking to go
to the countries that are most proximate where,
you know, again,
they may have family ties or just may feel
more comfortable with that for them or whatever.
So it's, it's not true
that if you, you know,
open things up that literally everyone in the world would want to come here.
That's just not the way it works.
So, you know, it's your point about like, oh,
it's not fair that Iraqis can't come like, OK,
so let's get them plane tickets but they,
-- but they
-- can't. That's my point.
And look Gallup survey two tw 2021 900 million
people would migrate to the west if they could.
Sorry, that's just not gonna happen.
And this is the same thing again,
I'm not arguing that we should just like let an unlimited number in.
I just think the focus only on restriction is,
and here's the other thing that I'll say is
there's this assumption
that the more cruel and restrictive you are at the border.
Number one, the more orderly it's gonna be,
that's not true because almost definition,
the worry that you're squeezing the number of actual legal mi
migrants,
the more you're gonna have illegal migrants because these are not
people who are like casually leaving their homes they have,
you know,
real reasons that are not gonna be mo and haven't shown uh any uh deterrence
based on the cruelty at the border or the restrictionist policies at the border.
I'll give you a perfect example
after Trump instituted
the child separation policy
with these dramatically cruel images.
I mean, some of the most like cruel imagery you could possibly imagine coming out,
the number of migrants actually went up
there has been no evidence that the more you crack down at the border that it actually
serves as a deterrent effect and people don't come
that simply has not worked out in history.
So even if your goal is like, let's keep people away,
the restrictionist
-- isn't
-- effective for that.
The counter to that is that the reason
they started coming back is because Trump caved and
he actually went away from family separation and
he basically reverted back to the original policy.
The one reason with the one time it worked was during
the pandemic when we didn't allow people to cross illegally,
period
and you have to stay in Mexico, which I support that policy. If you
didn't mean that people weren't coming,
it just meant that they were being dealt with at a different point.
And I, you know, the remain in Mexico policy have some issues with.
But the general principle of we should have structures and bureaucracy in place so
that the whole of the issue isn't being dealt with at the border,
I do think actually makes sense.
Yeah, I agree.
Uh There's actually was a Trump policy at the time which Biden did away with,
which encouraged people to
apply for asylum in their home country at the
US Embassy if they wanted to.
Unfortunately, that policy was done away with which I don't,
-- there
-- was also a Biden policy that would use this CBP one APP or something like that,
that would allow people to apply in their home countries,
which also was incredibly effective and which Republicans have, you know,
the one of the things that they're citing as a problem here is that it would
enable that program to continue.
-- I am not
-- saying the Republicans have been perfect on this issue.
In fact, they've been complicit and in many cases
uh have abetted this because it's good for big business.
What's, you know, in terms of the wage theory? So that's what I would say.
I am not a, you know, a Republican stand here,
I'm purely representing the interests, I guess of uh Mr Saga and Jetty from my again,
I think philosophical difference is that I think mass
mass illegal migration is bad.
I think mass migration net is also bad for the
United States foreign born population is far too high.
We need a long, long period of assimilation
and have a strong social safety net policy.
And I firmly believe that overall that this
type of unmitigated control and all that actually does
a great disservice to people like my family
and others who came to the country legally.
-- And it is an unfair policy. You
-- have the ability to
and your family had the money
and that's
how is that fair?
How is that fair though?
Because you had the resources to do it and you happen to be from
-- a country where there was a possibility of getting in that you're able
-- to,
first of all, nobody owes anybody.
So in terms of policy,
it makes sense that you probably want people who are higher skilled,
who already speak English and who are well educated so they
can more firmly and easily fit into the overall economy.
That's
number one.
Well, but that's a difference.
And then I don't think anybody has a right to come here.
-- And in fact, my net is that nobody has a
-- right here. Here's what I would say.
I do think
mass illegal migration
is a problem
not knowing who's coming in
having chaos at the border, having people who are being paid under the table
and who could, you know,
because they're working in the shadows that can depress wages.
No doubt that that is, that is for sure an issue
having a, you know,
significant level of legal migration where people have
a path where you can put the requirement,
OK?
They, you have to speak English or whatever.
I think that is net and throughout history has shown to be net beneficial to America.
I think it's a core part of why America has been as, you know,
economically successful and as vibrant and thriving and innovative as it has been
around history. So I just, you know, and there isn't, isn't evidence
that legal immigrants negatively impact wages for anyone, as I said before.
So the, as a population, they tend to be um over overall more law abiding,
that's what the numbers show
tend to be some of the hardest working people in the entire country.
And actually, you know,
oftentimes tend to have a lot of
conservative values that Republicans are excited to,
-- you know, crow about and try to win over when it's convenient for them
-- politically.
No question, you're right.
I think immigration has obviously been a net
positive to America wouldn't be here without it
uh throughout the past in this.
But I would also, again,
I would say that periods of great migration
were also followed by periods of great shutdowns.
And I think there was deep wisdom
in that because it allowed for assimilation and allowed for the benefit
of that industrialization before we had overall changes to our laws,
the Immigration
Naturalization Act of 1965 which by and large has
not changed and I think dramatically should change.
We currently have a chain migration based system where
if you happen to have a relative here,
it's easier to migrate,
which is nuts because it all should be mayor based which is what I support.
That's
n,
I think it makes sense that if you have that, I mean, the difference again,
like a tradition in America is if you know,
people who are in your family come and then they sort of set up and then you have some,
a support system that just because
t into,
but I think, I mean, to me it makes some sense.
Sure.
I mean, look, it has its proponents,
that's why it's been the law of the land for the last 50 years.
Uh What I would say is I think we should move like Australia,
Canada and many other Western developed countries to a
dramatically merit based immigration system with a point based
in terms of uh the criteria we've talked about
being able to speak English uh et cetera.
But that belies the fact that it's not going to be fair,
it's not fair because immigration shouldn't be fair.
Not everybody should have an equal right to immigrate or go anywhere and
I don't have an equal right to set foot in any country.
Whenever I
go through passport control, any country in the world can deny me if they want to, you
know,
the,
you know, the reality is because we are relatively well off and American,
we pretty much can go wherever we want,
we pretty much can go whatever we want.
So what you're advocating for is a policy where basically
like rich people can come and poor people can't.
And I, you know, even outside of the fair and I,
I don't actually think that that is the ideal migration
system because again, I think it's classes.
I think it ignores the, the skills and the abilities that, you know,
people who happen to have been born in the
wrong country and to the wrong set of parents
that they can bring to the table. And I think that's demonstrated by the strength
of America through migration throughout our history.
-- My
-- care for the poor and the lower class extends
to the borders of the United States for everybody.
Beyond that. II, I hope for the best for you, but it's not my problem.
And uh that can sound harsh if you want.
But I've seen enough of the world to know that there is so much
suffering that is out there that there's absolutely nothing I can do about it.
My parents are from India. I feel no obligation to street urchins in India.
I think that's the Indian government's problem. I think it's really sad.
I've seen a lot of them, you know, in
horrible sanitary conditions,
but I believe that the number is so vast and so grand that there's a certain hubris
to the extent that we can think that we can extend those rights and benefits to.
And that's where you and I are just fundament
different because the fact that we can't solve every problem for every person in
the world does not harden my heart to being able to do what we can
within the bounds of things that again are actually good for our country
and have been shown to be good for our country over time.
And the last thing I'll just go back to,
it doesn't make any sense to me that when, uh, New Yorkers are fleeing to Texas.
Oh, my God. This is terrible for New York. But when migrants who again, over time
law abiding
more law abiding than the native born population,
um hard working have gone through hell in order to get here
are gonna probably be way more patriotic than your average American.
But when they come,
suddenly it's a disaster and it's terrible if you say it doesn't make sense,
it just doesn't make sense to me.
Well, public opinion doesn't agree with you. I can at least say that
about that.
I think there are a lot of Americans who are very committed
to the basic concept of America as a nation of immigrants who,
you know, I mean, this is
again,
Biden ran on this last time around and he won the presidency and I think it's been,
I think it's foolish for him to completely abandon
the more inclusive messaging, not, you know,
any sort of radical open borders thing,
but the more inclusive messaging values based messaging
that helped him win the White House.
I think it's a dramatic political mistake. We'll see.
-- We've been
-- going for an hour, I believe so.
If people want to leave a comment and let us know, I hope that it was worth the
time. I think it was valuable.
I think people should be able to hear these different perspectives.
Hey guys, if you like that video,
go to breaking points.com become a premium subscriber and help
us build the best independent media organization on the planet.
-- That's right. We're
-- subscriber funded, we're building something new.
-- We want to replace these failing mainstream media
-- organizations.
So again to subscribe, it's Breaking points.com.